# Solutions to Project Euler problems

Each of the javascript files contains a solution to one of the problems (indicated by the file name).

All of the problems are tested in Node, and have (or will have) accompanying jest tests.

Problems can be found at [projecteuler.net](projecteuler.net).

The solutions provided are only up through then, and no more will be included in this ( a note on this is provided at the end).

Videos on each of these are available on YouTube, and their quality varies significantly, as some were done when I was but a few weeks into knowing JavaScript. They can be viewed [here](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCvfToc3ftGQ31IL6P5or6Hw).

## Multiple of 3 or 5

```
If we list all the natural numbers below 10 that are multiples of 3 or 5, we get 3, 5, 6 and 9. The sum of these multiples is 23.

Find the sum of all the multiples of 3 or 5 below 1000.
```

First solution: iterate through the numbers between 1 and 1000, store the ones divisible by three or five in an array. Sum the contents of that array

Second Solution: modifying the Gaussian formula, we take the rounded down value of: limit - 1 / divisor for each of the divisors and their product, the latter is subtract from the sum of the former two. 

## Even Fibonacci Numbers

```
Each new term in the Fibonacci sequence is generated by adding the previous two terms. By starting with 1 and 2, the first 10 terms will be:

1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, ...

By considering the terms in the Fibonacci sequence whose values do not exceed four million, find the sum of the even-valued terms.
```

Solution 1: we first run a while loop begining at 1, at verify if the number is divisible by two (and for reasons explained later on, less than four million). If it is, then we add that to our variable (fib) which sums the even values.
The trick with this sequence to to iterate the loop in two different pseudo loops contianed within the loop. The conditional checking for evenness runs twice, first on i, then on j, and after the check on i, i is set to the next number in the Fibonacci sequence.
Then, the second conditional check the same qualities in j, logs the evens, and sets to the next number of the Fibonacci sequence.

We set to the next value in the sequence by seting either i or j to sum of i and j, and the one set is the one that was just check for evenness.

The while loop ends when both i and j are above four million. If we set it to either rather than both, there is a scenario where one is above the that and the other is both below that and even, and _would not get logged since the while loop would have stopped_. To prevent that, we set to both, and have each if conditional check for being less than the limit as well.

Solution 2: Since it can be demonstrated that every third number in the Fibonacci sequence is even, we can iterate by sets of three, and only check to make sure the even numebr is less than the limit. It is added to the sum in each iteration.

## Largest Prime Factor

```
The prime factors of 13195 are 5, 7, 13 and 29.

What is the largest prime factor of the number 600851475143 ?
```

Solution: A bit less intuitive, but as we identify factors of the number passed in, we divide the original number from that factor for as many times as is possible, and set the possible return value to that divisor. Once that is complete, we check to see if what is left of the original number after th divisions is equal to 1. If it is, we can return the factor variable. If it is not, then that means the original number has a prime factor which is greater than its own square root (of which there can only be one), and which happens to be th current value of the original number, after the division operations.

## Largest Palindrome Product

```
A palindromic number reads the same both ways. The largest palindrome made from the product of two 2-digit numbers is 9009 = 91 × 99.

Find the largest palindrome made from the product of two 3-digit numbers.
```

Solution: For this we have two loops, one contained within another. The outer one starts with two variables i and j, and multiplies those together, checks to see if the reverse of the product is equal to the product, and logs if it is.

The second starts right after that, checking for the same, and iterates by subtracting 1 from j. One that second loop closes, j is reset to 999, and the loop iterates by subtracting 1 from i.

## Smallest Multiple

```
2520 is the smallest number that can be divided by each of the numbers from 1 to 10 without any remainder.

What is the smallest positive number that is evenly divisible by all of the numbers from 1 to 20?
```

Solution: The solution is broken into three parts. To understand the solution, we must first understand that the least common multiple of any consecutive set of numbers beginning at 1 (or 2) is the product of the primes in that set, where each prime m is raised to the power p such that m^p is still less than or equal to the uppoer boundary of the set. For example the least common multiple of 1 through 4 is 3 \* 2^2, or 12.

In the first part, we fin all primes contain between 1 and n (here, n equals 20).

In the second part, we take all those primes and raise them to their highest exponential power such that the value is still less than n (2 gets raised to the power of 4, 3 is raised to the power of 2, and the remaining primes stay at the power of 1).

In the third part, those numbers are multiplied togetehr

## Sum Square Difference

```
The sum of the squares of the first ten natural numbers is, 1^2 + 2^2 + ... + 10^2 = 385

The square of the sum of the first ten natural numbers is, (1 + 2 + ... + 10)^2 = 55^2 = 3025

Hence the difference between the sum of the squares of the first ten natural numbers and the square of the sum is 3025 - 385 = 2640.

Find the difference between the sum of the squares of the first one hundred natural numbers and the square of the sum.
```

Solution 1 (Brute Force): We initiate a for loop.

Inside the loop, we add to the square of the sums (and square when the loop exits) and we add to the sum of the squares with the iterators, i, in each case (i squared in the latter)

The former is subtracted from the latter.

Solution 2:

We square Gauss's formula to get the first number.
We use the formula for summing squared numbers, which is derived from Faulhauser's formula

The former is subtracted from the latter.

## 10001st Prime

```
By listing the first six prime numbers: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, and 13, we can see that the 6th prime is 13.

What is the 10 001st prime number?
```

Solution: This one assumes the first three primes to streamline the code. A while loop iterates starting at 7 iterates by 2 (there is only one prime number that is even, so we do not need to add one each time). Inside that is a while loop that starts at 2 (although we could just as well start at 3), and checks to see if any of the numbers up to a third of the possible prime are divisors (there is no odd number divisible by any number greater than its own third, except when that divisor is itself). We iterate by one, but we could iterate by two if we start at 3 (no odd number is the product of an even number and any other number). We would also have to assume 7 as a prime if we did that however.

The while loop ends when an array storing all of the primes reaches a specified length, and there is a console log of the last prime added.

This has gone through a couple of revisions since I first wrote it.

- We now only store 2 in the array and start the iteration at 3.
- The primeLogger is boolean
- The for loop now iterates over the previous primes and checks that the divisor being checked is less than or equal to the square root of the possible prime.
- The if statement contains a break statement to exit the for loop once both a divisor is found and the Boolean is set to true.
- j skips for divisibility by 2. It simiply isn't needed since all possibles checked are odd.

There are now two more solutions. The second does not assume that 2 is prime. THe third uses the fact that all primes except 2 and 3 are solutions to the equstion 6k +/- 1 to iterate.

## Largest Product in a Series

```
The four adjacent digits in the 1000-digit number that have the greatest product are 9 × 9 × 8 × 9 = 5832.

73167176531330624919225119674426574742355349194934
96983520312774506326239578318016984801869478851843
85861560789112949495459501737958331952853208805511
12540698747158523863050715693290963295227443043557
66896648950445244523161731856403098711121722383113
62229893423380308135336276614282806444486645238749
30358907296290491560440772390713810515859307960866
70172427121883998797908792274921901699720888093776
65727333001053367881220235421809751254540594752243
52584907711670556013604839586446706324415722155397
53697817977846174064955149290862569321978468622482
83972241375657056057490261407972968652414535100474
82166370484403199890008895243450658541227588666881
16427171479924442928230863465674813919123162824586
17866458359124566529476545682848912883142607690042
24219022671055626321111109370544217506941658960408
07198403850962455444362981230987879927244284909188
84580156166097919133875499200524063689912560717606
05886116467109405077541002256983155200055935729725
71636269561882670428252483600823257530420752963450

Find the thirteen adjacent digits in the 1000-digit number that have the greatest product. What is the value of this product?
```

Solution: We store the number, then convert it to an array. A while loop that iterates from the number of digits minus the amount of numbers multiplied. Each iteration multiplies 13 consecutive members of the array (array[i] \* array[i+1]...), and the product is stored in an array.

Once the loop is finished, the array storing all the products is sorted from least to greatest, and the last one is logged.

## Special Pythogorean Triplet

```
A Pythagorean triplet is a set of three natural numbers, a < b < c, for which, a^2 + b^2 = c^2

For example, 3^2 + 4^2 = 9 + 16 = 25 = 5^2.

There exists exactly one Pythagorean triplet for which a + b + c = 1000.
Find the product abc.
```

Solution 1: Because this is a special case of only having one solution, we do not need to worry about the array needing to contain multiple sets of solutions before having to multiply the elements. Therefore, we will need to declare a, b, c where b is always greater than a, and c greate than a

There are three for loops, nested in one another, with the outmost iterating for a, and the innermost, for c.

The function returns eother the product of a, b, and c if they equal the sum specifired, or 'nothing found'.

## Summation of Primes

```
The sum of the primes below 10 is 2 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 17.

Find the sum of all the primes below two million
```

Solution: First, as with previous problems, we need to identify primes within certain parameters with a for loop. Once those are identified, another for loop adds those primes up which have been stored in an array.

## Other Solutions

Project Euler asks that those who work on these problems do not share their answer past the first 100. I have chose only to provide solutions of the first ten, in an effort to respect their wishes. Anyone wishing to contact me about working on solutions may do so at christopher.backes@gmail.com.

Currently, I have solutions for: 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 40, 69.
The highest difficulty is 10%.
